From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
[Music]
For weeks, fights have been escalating
between the CDC's top scientists and the
health secretary, Robert F. Kennedy Jr.,
culminating in his accusation that the
AY's top official was untrustworthy and
a liar. On Wednesday, that official,
Susan Manarez, went before Congress to
give her side of the story.
My colleague Cheryl Gay Stolberg unpacks
that testimony and the rift that the
hearing exposed within the Republican
party over how far they will go to back
Kennedy and his vaccine agenda.
It's Thursday, September 18th.
Cheryl, thank you so much for making
time for us. It was obviously a very
busy day for you watching this hearing,
which we were all glued to. So, we
really appreciate it. Thanks for having
me.
>> So, on the show, we have been covering
the chaos at the CDC because in just a
span of a few weeks, the head of the
agency was fired. Several high-ranking
officials quit in protest. Robert F.
Kennedy Jr., the head of health and
human services, which obviously oversees
the CDC. He had to answer for a lot of
this in front of the Senate last week.
And today, the person that he ousted was
in front of Congress to explain her side
of the story, which to me was quite
striking because we haven't seen her
heard her voice, heard her explain her
version of events. And I'm just sort of
curious, you who actually covers this
world, what were you going into this
hearing looking for and paying attention
to?
>> I wanted to see what it really felt like
to work with and for Robert F. Kennedy
Jr., the health secretary. You know, the
CDC has been through a really rough year
since Mr. Kennedy took office.
>> There have been mass layoffs. The
secretary is dismantling the agency and
reorganizing it. A gunman opened fire on
the agency.
>> That's right. I remember that.
>> Killing a police officer in a rain of
bullets. And then finally, Kennedy
pushes out the CDC director who was only
29 days on the job. So, what happened
here?
[Music]
Kennedy often talks about radical
transparency.
Yet, a lot of what he does isn't really
radically transparent. We don't have
much insight into how he leads the
agency, what he's like to work with. So,
I guess I wanted to know what it felt
like to be a public health official in
this era under his leadership.
[Music]
Basically, the hearing in your view is a
kind of a rare window into the inner
workings of the CDC under Robert F.
Kennedy Jr.
>> Yes, I think that's right.
>> Okay. So, set the stage for me. How does
this hearing start?
>> So, the room is packed. There's an
overflow room because there are so many
people out in the hallway waiting to get
in. And Dr. Susan Manarees, the fired
CDC director, and also Dr. Deborah
Howry, the former CDC chief medical
officer. Walk in, you know, when the
cameras are going, but really all eyes
are on Manares. The chairman of the
committee, Senator Bill Cassidy,
Republican of Louisiana, bangs the
gabble, opens the hearing. Um, this
hearing is a direct response to
President Trump's call for radical
transparency in how we conduct
governmental affairs
>> and announces that he is convening this
hearing because he wants to know if
federal health agencies are living up to
the goal of radical transparency that
President Trump has set.
>> So, he's basically using President
Trump's words.
>> He's really using Kennedy's words. It's
Kennedy who's always talked about
radical transparency
>> and I thank Secretary Robert Kennedy for
echoing that call for radical
transparency
>> and Cassidy was kind of throwing those
words back at the health secretary.
>> Now it's important to remember that
Cassidy is in a really precarious
position.
>> I approach this hearing as both a doctor
and as a senator. He's a doctor, an
ardent proponent of vaccines, and he
really agonized publicly over whether or
not to vote to confirm Kennedy. And he
did vote to confirm him. He cast a
crucial vote. And he did so he said at
the time because Kennedy had offered him
assurances that they would have a very
close working relationship
and that he would not undo current
vaccine policy or create parallel
vaccine approval structures.
>> Today we'll hear from Dr. Manores and
Dr. AI who have raised serious
allegations that strike at the core of
the CDC's credibility
>> and he's clearly uncomfortable with some
of the things that Kennedy has done. And
he also notes that Dr. Manares is the
first ever CDC confirmed director. All
the Republicans voted for her, he said,
and she gets fired 29 days later. And so
part of our responsibility today is to
ask ourselves if someone is fired 29
days after every Republican votes for
her, like what happened?
Did we fail? Was there something we
should have done differently?
>> He says, "Did we do our job? Is there
something we missed?"
>> Yeah. I was watching the hearing too and
what really struck me is that Cassidy
seemed so frankly kind of frustrated
that this person that he as we know was
on the fence about seemed to have not
really lived up to some of the things
that he promised Congress. And so
Cassidy like sets the tone for this
hearing and the big question it seemed
was what happened inside the CDC from
Dr. Manar's point of view. Thank you for
the opportunity to testify before you
again.
Secretary Kennedy himself swore me in on
July 31st, calling me a public health
expert with unimpeachable scientific
credentials.
>> So Manares uses her opening statement to
lay that out. She says, "A lot of things
have been said about the reason she was
removed. Since my removal, several
explanations have been offered. That I
told the secretary I would resign, that
I was not aligned with the
administration priorities,
or that I was untrustworthy.
None of those reflect what actually
happened.
>> She says none of that is true. He
directed me to commit in advance to
approving every ACIP recommendation
regardless of the scientific evidence.
>> She says that he wanted her to commit in
advance to approving all the
recommendations of his handpicked panel
of vaccine adviserss. He wanted her to
fire CDC civil servants, career
scientists responsible for vaccine
policy.
>> She said no. I could not replace
evidence with ideology or compromise my
integrity.
>> And at some point he says to her,
>> Secretary Kennedy told me he could not
trust me.
>> He can't trust her.
>> I told the secretary that if he believed
he could not trust me, he could fire me.
>> And Manares testifies that she said to
him, "If you believe you can't trust me,
you can fire me." Very different.
>> Yeah. I could have stayed silent, agreed
to the demands, and no one would have
known.
>> And she wraps up by saying that she
could have stayed, she could have kept
the title, but that doing that would
cost her the one thing that was most
important, which was her own scientific
integrity.
>> So basically, in her testimony, she's
trying to set the record straight on
what went down that led to her firing.
>> That's right. But when the Democrats
questioned her,
>> Senator Hass,
>> especially Senator Maggie Hass, they
kind of gave her an opening to talk
about the thing that I was really
interested in, which is what did it feel
like to work for Robert F. Kennedy Jr.
>> When you pushed back on Secretary
Kennedy's demands, how did he react?
>> He was very upset. Manares shared an
account of this critical meeting that
she had with the secretary and some of
his top deputies about a week before her
firing.
>> And she says
>> he was very upset throughout the
entirety of our discussion.
>> Kennedy was very upset and very
animated.
>> It was not a productive exchange of
>> and she clearly doesn't want to go too
far with that. But she tells the
senators that Kennedy hurled insults
about CDC employees,
>> emphasized that CD employees were
horrible people, that CDC employees were
killing children and they don't care. He
said that C employees were bought by the
pharmaceutical industry called uh in
that context CDC the most corrupt
federal agency in the world. He said CDC
forced people uh to wear masks and
social distance like a dictatorship.
And the one I think that hurt uh me the
most was a particularly vivid uh phrase
he said during the CO outbreak. CDC told
hospitals to turn away sick CO patients
until they had blue lips before allowing
them to get treatment.
>> And it is fair to say in your view that
those statements are not true.
>> Those statements are not true.
>> Thank you. She says none of that was
true. None of those accusations were
true. So on the whole it sort of seems
like Dr. Manarez is painting a picture
of Robert F. Kennedy Jr. as a leader who
is tense and angry in meetings and who
seems to have a real disdain for the
agency that she works for.
>> Yes, I think that's right. And another
thing that came out under questioning
from Senator Tammy Baldwin, the Democrat
of Wisconsin, is that after Kennedy
threatened to push Manores out, she
called the health committee to share her
concerns. Secretary Kennedy became aware
of that and he was very concerned that I
had spoken to members of Congress and he
told me I was never to do it again
>> and he told her never to do that again
that she should not talk to members of
Congress. Congress and the American
people need to know what is happening at
the CDC and this censorship is not
radical transparency and it is
unacceptable.
>> And Senator Bernie Sanders, independent
of Vermont, but the ranking member says,
>> "I find it rather astounding that anyone
is concerned that government heads of
agencies talk to the elected officials
of the United States of America. That is
what they are supposed to do.
>> This is exactly what a federal official
is supposed to do. They're they're
supposed to talk to senators who oversee
their agency. And just the fact that
Democrats were aligning themselves so
aggressively with Manares really
illustrated this vast shift that has
happened politically over the past
month.
>> What kind of a shift? Well, every
Democrat voted against confirming Susan
Manarez and every Republican voted for
her.
>> And at this hearing today, you had
Democrats lauding her as a hero.
>> And thanks to our witnesses for being
here today,
>> one of them, Senator Tim Kaine of
Virginia.
>> Dr. Menars, I owe you an apology.
>> Actually apologized to her
>> when you were here for your confirmation
hearing. My worries about the direction
of HHS made me question you very
significantly on your backbone.
>> You did
>> a trait that is not in long supply in
this town.
>> He said, "I voted against you because I
thought you would have no backbone."
>> And I was wrong and I apologize to you
for being wrong.
>> How often do you hear a member of
Congress say something like that?
>> When you're wrong to admit you're wrong.
>> I think it's pretty rare to hear a
member of Congress say the words, "I was
wrong." I thought it was so striking.
>> Yeah.
And on the other side, you had
Republicans, all of whom voted for
Manares,
really grappling with how to handle her
firing and for some with their growing
unease about Secretary Kennedy.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
So, Cheryl, we just talked a lot about
how the Democrats basically had this
uniform opposition to the way that
Robert F. Kennedy Jr. has been leading
the agency during his relatively short
tenure and watching the hearing as you
noted the Republican response was really
a lot more fractured. So I'm curious if
you can just sort of describe the
various approaches. Yeah. So there are
like two camps of Republicans at this
hearing. There was the all-in for Trump
camp of Republicans, and by that I mean
all-in for Trump and Kennedy. And then
there was the queasy kind of uneasy
Republicans who voted to confirm Kennedy
and are now asking a lot of questions.
>> Thank you. So, uh, thank you so much for
being here. And Dr. So to start with the
all-in Republicans, I think a good
example is Mark Wayne Mullen.
>> I I I I think you might have an honesty
issue here that we want to point out.
>> Mark Wayne Mullen was pressing her on
whether or not she was telling the
truth.
>> Your conversation with the secretary,
>> you said that he said he didn't trust
you.
>> Correct.
>> You testified to that. Is that really
how that conversation went? because
there's other people in the room and I
think the conversation was can he trust
you and your answer was
>> he said he could not trust me.
>> No, the answer
>> at one point Mullen said
>> ma'am it was a recorded meeting.
>> There was a recording of the meeting on
August 25th between Dr. Manares and
Secretary Kennedy in which Kennedy
threatened to fire her and that really
set Chairman Cassidy off. I will note
that if materials have been provided to
Senator Mullen and invoked in official
committee business, they are committee
records and all other senators on the
committee have the right to see those
records.
>> He said if there is a recording of this
meeting, the committee needs to have it.
It shouldn't be in the possession of one
senator. And then Mullen later told
reporters he was mistaken. He didn't
have a recording. There is no evidence
really that a recording exists.
>> Oh dear.
>> And then you know the other senators who
are all in for Trump were the other
doctors on the committee. Rand Paul of
Kentucky and Roger Marshall of Kansas.
And they seem to really want to reopen a
discussion of vaccine policy in America.
>> Okay. The CDC currently recommends
between 70 and 80 shots over the child's
lifetime. Do you fully support that
recommendation that every child needs
every vaccine as recommended by the CDC?
>> The data associated with those
recommendations has been validated and
vetted. That is the current schedule.
>> They make clear that they think the CDC
is unwilling to challenge its decade old
recommendations
for childhood vaccines.
And they are proddding manares to talk
about the evidence.
>> See, everybody's like blindly going
along. We can't change the childhood.
You're somehow terrible. If you want to
change the childhood, we should be
discussing what is the childhood vaccine
schedule and the burden should be on
you. You want to make all the kids take
this, the burden is upon you. And Paul
was saying, "Look, we want to open up a
discussion here about
childhood vaccine recommendations, all
vaccine recommendations."
>> Okay. So, that's the camp of Republicans
who are aligning themselves with Robert
F. Kennedy Jr. and President Trump. What
about the other Republican camp you
mentioned? I think you called them
queasy.
>> The queasy camp. Yes,
>> the queasy camp. The queasy camp is
really led by Senator Cassidy, but also
includes, I think, Susan Collins,
Republican of Maine, Lisa Marowski, the
Republican of Alaska, and all express
serious concern with Secretary Kennedy's
approach to vaccine policy. What happens
then to this scientific mission when
there are none of the career public
health professionals to advise on the
policy?
>> Cassidy is exhibit A.
>> As I close, I'm going to speak as a
liver doctor.
>> You know, as chairman of the committee,
Cassidy has the right to make closing
remarks to close out the hearing. and he
uses his remarks to deliver this
impassion speech on behalf of a vaccine
that is very very important to him, the
hepatitis B vaccine.
>> Folks know I'm a physician. As it turns
out, I am a hepatologist, which is a
liver specialist and have published
papers on liver disease and have seen
people die from hepatitis. He's a liver
specialist and the vaccine is important
to him because hepatitis B is a disease
of the liver. But the vaccine is also in
Kennedy's crosshairs.
>> One thing that reportedly is going to be
discussed at the upcoming ACIP meeting
is ending the recommendation for the
birth dose of hepatitis B vaccine.
>> Kennedy has kind of gone after uh the
lowhanging fruit, if you will. He
narrowed recommendations on COVID
vaccines and hepatitis B vaccine is
clearly up next in his sites. The
vaccine is given routinely to infants at
birth. That is the recommendation, but
there's controversy over it. Hepatitis B
is a disease that is transmitted either
sexually or through dirty needles. Can
also be transmitted during birth through
the birth canal. And people like Kennedy
and Ran Paul say, "Look, if this is a
sexually transmitted disease and it's
you get it through, you know, drug use,
sharing dirty needles, you know, let's
just test moms for hepatitis B when they
give birth. And if they're not positive
for it, let them make a choice about
whether to give this vaccine to their
baby. It doesn't have to be routine."
For those who say, "Why should a child
be vaccinated for a sexually transmitted
disease when they're at birth?" The
child passes through the birth canal,
and that passage through the birth canal
makes that child vulnerable to the virus
being transmitted. If that child is
infected at birth, more than 90% of them
develop chronic lifelong infection. But
supporters of the vaccine say that you'd
really be exposing a lot of kids to harm
if you did that. That it'd be really
difficult to screen every mom for
hepatitis B.
>> And so that is a debate that is going to
happen just this week before the
advisory committee for immunization
practices.
>> The committee that makes recommendations
for vaccines.
>> Yes. and the committee is going to vote
on the recommendation and Cassidy
clearly feels a real sense of urgency
here.
>> Now, by the way, there's some who said
they've never seen it, so therefore it
cannot exist. It does occur. It occurs
less often now. So, we can argue now
that we've controlled it, do we let the
genie out of the bottle? He's got the
platform here on the eve of this hearing
and he wants to make his views known and
his views are at odds with those of the
health secretary that he is almost
singularly responsible for installing an
office.
>> Thank you again for the witnesses. Thank
you for the audience. You're very
respectful. The committee stands
adjourned.
The statement that Cassidy makes at the
end of the hearing in a lot of ways sort
of seemed like he's setting the stage
for something much larger that this
fight over public health isn't just
about one vaccine that he is talking
about something that feels a little bit
more existential.
Yes, I think he is using hepatitis B to
illustrate
the broader story of what will happen if
all of these vaccine recommendations get
rolled back. And I think he's kind of
saying that,
>> you know, we did the COVID vaccines, now
we're going to go after hepatitis.
What's next? What other disease is going
to be
on the horizon because vaccine
recommendations
are being undone? He's issuing a
warning.
>> But beyond the debate about vaccines, in
some ways, it feels like this hearing
was a larger referendum about how much
push back is possible in this current
political environment. And what I
thought seemed like it was on display
here was that Republicans who did not
agree with what is happening at the CDC,
they could push back on RFK Jr. for
undermining science in their view. But
what they would not do is they would not
push back on President Trump. And that
was a line that senators like Marowski
and Collins and Cassidy, that was
something they were so careful to tow.
>> I think that's exactly right.
Cassidy, he is in a tight spot. He's
running for reelection. He's got a
primary challenge from the right. And to
the extent that RFK Jr. is embraced by
Trump, it will be very difficult to
really go after him. But if Trump grows
dissatisfied in some way with Kennedy,
then it will be a lot easier for these
Republicans who are uneasy with the
health secretary to go after him. But
there isn't evidence of that yet. My
colleague Maggie Haberman and I reported
last week that while there are tensions
between Trump and Kennedy,
there's no evidence of a break between
them. Cheryl, I feel like there were a
couple things that stood out to me about
this hearing. One, as you mentioned, was
this highwire act that Republicans were
doing. And another one was the fact that
we were hearing from somebody who was
directly singled out by the Trump
administration to be fired, speaking
publicly for the first time in this
obviously very public format. And I just
sort of wonder at the end of all of
this, what was your big takeaway?
This is about the health of future
generations.
Vaccines have long been considered a
singular achievement of public health.
Other than clean water and sanitation,
vaccines have swept scourges out of our
lives. from smallpox to polio to what
were once considered more routine
childhood diseases like measles before
the vaccine was introduced in 1963.
And we're at this moment where
everything is being thrown into
question.
>> All of this is up for debate.
And you saw that in the split between
Republicans and between the Republican
doctors, right? You had one doctor
Cassidy saying,
"Don't undo this progress. We need these
vaccines." And you had another doctor,
Ran Paul, saying, "Look, we need to
start having a debate. We need to open
up a debate." And I think what we're
going to see is really the the
dimmunition of the influence of the CDC.
We're already seeing that for its 80
years in existence, the CDC has issued
recommendations that have been followed
by states, every state in the country.
That is no longer the case.
We have breakaway states now like
Florida, which announced that it is
ending its childhood vaccine mandates.
Cassid's own home state of Louisiana has
a hooping cough outbreak. Now, two
children have died in that outbreak and
Cassidy has asked publicly for Kennedy
to recommend and encourage vaccination.
Kennedy hasn't said a word about the
pertasus or hoping cough vaccine. So, I
think we're really on a precipice and I
think that's what this hearing revealed.
[Music]
Cheryl, thank you so much.
>> Thanks, Rachel.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know.
Today, ABC announced on Wednesday that
it was pulling Jimmy Kimmel's late night
show, quote, "Indefinitely," over
comments that he made in his opening
monologue earlier this week about the
motives of the man who shot Charlie
Kirk.
>> We hit some new lows over the weekend
with the MAGA gang desperately trying to
characterize this kid who murdered
Charlie Kirk as anything other than one
of them and doing everything they can to
score political points from it. In
between,
>> conservatives accused the longtime host
of inaccurately describing the politics
of the alleged shooter. The abrupt
decision by the network, which is owned
by the Walt Disney Company, came hours
after the chairman of the Federal
Communications Commission, Brendan Carr,
assailed Mr. Kimmel and suggested that
the FCC might take action against the
network because of the remarks that
Kimmel had made on his Monday telecast.
And the move exacerbated concerns that
the Trump administration was
intentionally targeting media
organizations and speech that it objects
to.
And the Federal Reserve lowered interest
rates for the first time this year by a
quarter point and signaled that it might
cut rates again this year because of
ongoing concerns about the labor market.
The decision comes as President Trump
has intensified his pressure campaign on
the Fed, which has included an attempt
to oust a sitting member of the Board of
Governors.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Stella
Tan, Jessica Chung, and Alex Stern with
help from Caitlyn O'Keefe. It was edited
by MJ Davis Lynn and Liz O Balon and was
engineered by Chris Wood.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.
[Music]